 ## Introduction to Assembly 
 
#### Bit and Bytes
 
 - At the lowest levels computers operate with electrical signals.
 - Switching the electric signals between on and off.
 - 8 bits are in a byte, originally different systems made different choices for how many bits were in a byte.
    - 6-bit Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code represents alphanumeric 
    - At one point bytes were 4 bits long
    - 8-bit bytes were standarized in 1960 by IBM's Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code
 - 8 Bits were chosen for the following reasons: 
    - 256 characters seemed sufficent enough for most applications
    - A single alphanumeric character can be represented by a single byte (00000001)
    - Economically reasonable for storage space ? 

#### Character Encoding

  - ASCII uses 7 bits per byte, which is enough for the english language but not others. 
  - The Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code which would allow for swapping to different languages
  - The Unicode project was created to standardize all living languages
  - Hexidecimals can also be used to identify letters
    - A -> 0x41 
    - R -> 0x52 
    - M -> 0x4D
  - Each hexidecimal digit can be encoded with the binary patterns between 0000 and 1111 
  
#### Machine Code Assembly

  - If we were to create our own computer processor, we would need to map binary patterns to machine codes. For our processor to interpret
  - Machine codes are meant to instruct circuitry to perform an operation, or also known as instruction codes (operation codes, opcodes).
  - Instruction encodings are either 32 bit or 16 bit
  - The ARM Architecure reads the instruction set created to be executed on the CPU 
  - As an example if we were to write our own instruction set we would need opcodes for addition and subtraction: 
    - Addition -> 0001110
    - Subtraction -> 0001111
  - For the example above we wouldn't want to write binary when creating the instruction set. Instead we would use mnemonic, a shorthand human readable format. 
    - Addition -> 0001110 -> ADD
    - Subtraction -> 0001111 -> SUB 
  - We would also need to know what data we're performing an operation on, this data/values need to be stored somewhere (like in a variable). 
  - These Temporary values are usually stored in registers
  - Programs pull in values from memory or the disk into a register
  - Since we're using a 16 bit instruction set for our example and have only used 7 bits for both addition and subtraction, we have 9 bits left ( 7 + 9, 16 bit instruction obviously).
  - To continue our example: 
    - Addition -> ADD -> 0001110
    - Subtraction -> SUB -> 0001111
    - Interger Value 2 -> 2 -> 010
    - Operand Register -> R0 -> 000
    - Destination Register -> R1 -> 001 
  - Using the definitions above we can say:
    ``` 
    ADD R1, R0, #2
    ```
    
    In Hexidecimal format
    ```
    0x1C81
    ```
    
    The machine code pattern would be then handled by our example processor
    
  - There's a design detailing what's going on but I'll explain it for myself: 
     - A program is loaded into memory
     - A value in that program has a memory address
     - The register loads the value based on the memory address and is represented differently by something else. 
     - So same value, different identifier
     
#### Assembling

 - Assemblers -> Convert our assembly instructions into machine code
 - Assemblers can switch between different instruction sets, and switch between data
 - The GNU Assembler is used to assemble the Linux kernel, Microsoft has an assembler, armasm is ARM's Toolchain Assembler
 - Take this instruction set for example: 
    
    ```
    .section .text 
    .global _start
    _start: 
    .thumb 
        move r1, #5
        ldr  r3, [r2]
    ```
    
    The first three lines are assembler directives. 
    .text -> where the data should be assembled
    .global _start -> entry point of our code
    .thumb -> instruction encoding
    
 - Compiling the code with the GNU Assembler asm.
   This command creates an object file called myasm.o
    ```
    as myasm.s -o myasm.o
    ```
    
 - Labels can reference a specific adddress in memory
   ```
   .section .text 
   .global _start
   
   _start: 
            mov r1, #5
            mov r2, #6
            b mylabel
            
   result: 
            mov r0, r4 
            b _exit
   my_label: 
            add r4, r1, r2
            b result
   _exit: 
            mov r7, #0
            svc #0 
   ```
   For the example above, the .text section holds the data, _start is global and the entry point to the assemnley program. 
   Move the value 5 into the r1
   Move value 6 into register r2
   jump to mylabel
   Place the result of adding r1 and r2 into r4 (5 + 6 = 11)
   Jump to result
   Move the value r4 (11) into the register r0 
   Jump to the _exit label
   Move 0 into the register r7 ? 
   svc #0 ? 
   
   The labels for example, my_label gives hints to the linker that assigns relative memory locations to them. 
   
   - Labels can also be used to fetch the contents of a memory location, or jump to a different insturction in the code: 
     ```
     .section  .text
     .global  _start 
     
     _start: 
            mov r1, #5
            adr r2, myvalue
            ldr r3, [r2]
            b mylabel
            
     result:
           mov r0, r4
           b _exit
        
     mylabel:
           add r4, r1, r3
           b result
           
     myvalue: 
     .word 2 
     ```
     The .text section will be used to handle data
     Set the entry point _start to global
     Move value 5 into register R1 
     Read the value in the label myvalue, place the value into register r2
     Reference the r2 value in memory, place the same value into r3
     Jump to mylabel
     Add the values from register r1 and r3 together (5 + 2 = 7)
     Jump to result
     Move register value r4 (7) into register r0 
     Jump to _exit which isn't stated in this assembly code

 - This code prints out hello world to the console
    ```
    .section .text
    .global _start
    
    _start: 
            mov r0, #1
            adr r1, mystring
            mov r2, #6
            mov r7, #6
            svc #0
            
    _exit: 
            mov r7, #0
            svc #0
    mystring: 
    .string "Hello\n"
    ```
    This one is self explanatory

    ```
    as myasm2.c -o myasm2.o
    ld myasm2.o myasm2
    ./myasm2
    Hello
    ```
    
 - Mode assemblers are usually incorporated into compiler toolchains. Designed to be output into larger executable programs. 
 - When an object file is created, it includes the assembly instruction, symbol information, and hints for the compiler's linker program.
 - The linker is responsible for creating a full executable file
 
#### Cross Compilers

 - If I were to run a Arm program on a different architecture there would be an error, stating that the binary file cannot be executed.
 - This is due to the fact the instructions are encoded differently.
 - We need to write assembly code for the correct architecture, and assemble it using an assembler that knows the instruction set. 
 - A Cross Compiler for instance would be running on the x64 architecture but can still compiler arch binaries because it knows the instruction set. 
 
## High Level Languages

 - A main reason why Assembly language isn't popular is due to the fact it isn't portable. 
 - People run many different machines which could differ in architectures, to rewrite assembly code for each architecture would be exhuasting. 
 - High Level languages like C and C++ resolve this issue. 
 - Whether C and C++ are considered to be low level or high level languages in modern day is up for debate.
 - Compilers are used to convert high level language into machine code. 
 - Output of compilers are generally executable files that can be run on a specific operating system. 
 - It's difficult to reverse an executable into the original source code since compilers perform many opreations and create a layer of obstraction. 
 
## Disassembling

 - Reconstructing the assembly instructions that the binary would run from their machine code format into human readable assembly language. 
 - Disassembling can be done in multiple ways
 - Essentially source code is converted into assembly code, or at least attempted
 
## Decompilation

 - While disassemblers convert the object fil into a assembly code, decompilers attempt to convert the code into C or C++
 - Generally this is pseudo code, almost unreadable
 - Decompilers like IDA Pro and Ghidra will create different output 
 
